## 07 Progressivism

>Reading
p.776-793
p.783-784, 845-846
p.796-798
p.791-792
Article: Forgotten Fight for Suffrage
Article: [The Most Damnable Outrage](https://erenow.net/modern/theodorerex/4.php). Focus on South's reaction and Roosevelt's views on Race
Article: [A Negro's Life is a Very Cheap Thing](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/books/chap1/atthehandsofpersonsunknown.htm). Focus on effect of lynching on W.E.B Du Bois

Progressivism issues still around today: Political Participation

**All citizens should vote. Here's why.**
1\. Your vote counts.
+ George W. Bush won the 2000 presidential election by 537 popular votes in Florida out of about 6 million votes cast in the state.

2\. Voting empowers you. Here's how it works.
+ When you vote, you put yourself in the electoral system.
+ You become part of the select group of citizens that pollsters and politicians care about and pay attention to.
+ Pollsters and politicians only care about and pay attention to voters - not to non-voters.

If you're interested in learning more about voting, Google this: **Planet Earth Gets a Ground Game** (From Washington Monthly Magazine). This article highlights the Environmental Voter Project at environmentalvoter.org.
The Progressive Era saw major advancements in environmental conservation.

>President Theodore Roosevelt: "I hate a man who skins the land." (Tindall, p. 798)

#### Key Terms
Muckrakers (p.780)
+ America's first investigative journalists

17th Amendment (p.787)
+ Direct election of senators.

WCTU (Women's Christian Temperance Union) (p.790)
+ WCTU became one of the largest and most influential women's groups of the 19th century by expanding its platform to campaign for labor laws, prison reform and suffrage.
+ Middle-class women reformers, most of them movtivated by stroong religious conviction, were the driving force behind social justice movement. Among the most powerful campaigns was that of the WCTU. (Consuming any alcohol was a sin).

The National Child Labor Committee (p.791)
+ Campaigned for laws prohibiting the employment of children.

Triangle Shirtwaist fire (p.792)
+ Triangle Shirtwaist Facrtory
+ In the fire's aftermath, dozens of new city and state regulations dealing with fire hazards, dangerous working conditions, and child labor were enacted across the nation.

16th Amendment (p.793)
+ Income Tax. (Theodore Roosevelt announced his support.)

The Jungle (p.797)
+ A novel, which told the story of a Lithuanian immigrant working in a filthy Chicago meatpacking plant.

Meat Inspection Act
+ The **Federal Meat Inspection Act of** 1906 (FMIA) is an American law that makes it a crime to adulterate or misbrand meat and meat products being sold as food, and ensures that meat and meat products are slaughtered and processed under sanitary conditions.

Pure Food And Drug Act (p.798)
+ Required the makers of prepared food and medicines to host government inspectors.
+ Excerpt from the **Pure Food and Drug Act**. An Act — For preventing the manufacture, sale, or transportation of adulterated or misbranded or poisonous or deleterious foods, drugs, medicines, and liquors, and for regulating traffic therein, and for other purposes.

Federal Trade Commission (p.810)
+ Wilson decided to make a strong Federal Trade Commission the cornerstone of his anti-trust program.
+ The **Federal Trade Commission** is an independent agency of the United States government, established in 1914 by the Federal Trade Commission Act. Its principal mission is the promotion of consumer protection and the elimination and prevention of anticompetitive business practices, such as coercive monopoly.

### Introduction
**What is Progressivism?**
+ The name given to an era of reform: roughly 1900-1917
+ A moment that transformed America's politics, economy, and society.

**What were the catalysts behind progressive reforms?**

**What spurred progressive reformers to act, to seek change?**
+ Problems stemming from industrialization, urbanization, and immigration.

**What was the general aim of Progressive movement?**
+ From Tindall, "The progressive movement represented the common spirit of an age rather than a single organized group or party. What reformers shared was a common assumption that the complex social ills and tensions generated by the urban-industrial revolution required expanding the scope of local, state, and federal government authority so as to elevate the public interest over private greed."

**What social and economic problems did progressives try to fix?**
+ Monoploy
+ Inequality
+ Work Condition (Child Labor)
+ Alcohol Consumption

### 1. The Features of Progressivism
(What Progressives Advocated)

#### A. Democratic Political Reform
Progressives believed that more democracy would:
+ Reduce corruption in the political progressive
+ Break up the coalition between government and business
+ Make government more responsive to citizens

Democratic political reforms would provide citizens with tools to restrain concentrated corporate power.

**Structural changes** progressives made to the political system include:
+ The **direct primary election** allows voters to choose which political parties will nominate. Prior to this progressive, the power to select policital party nominees belonged to party leaders and officeholders. (**state law**)
+ The **direct initiative** allows voters to originate and enact state laws. Prior to this progress reform, the power to make state laws belongs to each state's legislature. (**state law**)
+ The **recall** allows voters to remove from office elected state officials before the expiration of their term. Prior to this progressive reform, the power to remove elected state officials belonged to each state's legislature. (**state law**)
+ The **direct election of U.S. senators** (17th Amendment)
+ Women's suffrage (19th Amendment)

>**19th Amendment**
1\. No voting discrimination based on gender.
2\. Nullified states' right to decide) (changed the **Constitution**) (p.783-384, 845-846)

**Progressivists Disappointed** by women voting
+ Turn out at 1920. 37% of eligible women vote.
+ The end of man.
+ Prior to 26th Amendment (1972), states decide if 18-20s can vote

>**26th Amendment**
No voting discrimination base on age if you are 18.
Nullified states' right to decide.

**Sum it up**
+ Turn out. Women $\uparrow$, 18-20 $\downarrow$.
+ Women vote like men. No Gender Gap. (Another Disappointment)
+ **Notes**: Not black women in south (19th Amendment was blocked by Jim Crow law).


**African American** make significant contributions.
**African American** point of view: **Betrayed by white women.**


#### B. Government Regulation
Progressives wanted more government regulation.

**What is government regulation?**
+ Government regulation is the continuous monitoring by government departments and experts of the economic power concentrated in corporations. Progressives believed that government monitoring of corporations would occur on behalf of the citizens.

**What force were driving the government to expand its roles in society and the economy?**
+ Industrialism and urbanization-and technological change generally-made society and the economy increasingly **interdependent**. Citizens increasingly depended on corporations.
+ Citizens turned to government to manage interdependent and to protect citizens from powerful economic interests.
+ Private groups of citizens (interest group) demanded government help in advancing their goals.

During the period 1900-1920, progressives responded to these factors by increasing government intervention in the economy and society.

**What happened during the Progressive era that convinced many citizens that more government regulation was needed?**
+ Read about conditions in the meatpacking plants and take notes here. (p.796-798)
+ Read about child labor and take notes here. (p.791-792)
+ Read about the Triangle Shirtwaist and take notes here. (p.792)

### Conclusion: The Legacy of Progressivism
+ Think of the Progressivism era as two decades of increasing government intervention in the economy and society.
+ By 1920, 19th century notions of strictly limited government intervention ("laissez-faire") has been eclipsed.
+ Progressives helped established **the public service concept of the state**: the belief that government should be active and seek to solve social and economic problems.
+ Be sure to memorized this definition of the public service concept of the state.
